pretty much everyone loves eating pizza
but it can be a messy business Pizza is
soft and bendable so how can you stop
all that cheese from falling off you
might know some of the tricks you can
use two hands not so classy or you can
use a paper plate and allow only the
very tip of the pizza to peek out
there's one other trick though holding
the crust you can start up fold the
slice down in the middle now the tip of
the pizza isn't falling over and you can
eat it without getting tomato sauce all
over yourself or accidentally biting off
some of that paper plate but why should
the tip stay up just because you've bent
the crust to understand this you need to
know two things a little bit about the
math of curved shapes and a little bit
about the physics of thin sheets first
the math suppose I have a flat sheet
made out of rubber it's really thin and
bendable so it's easy to roll into a
cylinder I don't need to stretch the
sheet at all just bend it this property
where one shape can be transformed into
another without stretching or crumpling
is called isometry a mathematician would
say that a flat sheet is isometric to a
cylinder but not all shapes are
isometric if I try to turn my flat sheet
into part of his sphere there's no way I
can do it you can check this for
yourself by trying to fit a flat sheet
of paper onto a soccer ball without
stretching or crumpling the paper it's
just not possible so a mathematician
would say that a flat sheet and a sphere
irons isometric there's one more
familiar shape that isn't isometric to
any of the shapes we've seen so far a
potato chip potato chip shapes aren't
isometric to flat sheets if you want to
get a flat piece of rubber into the
shape of a potato chip you need to
stretch it not just bend it but stretch
it as well so that's the math not so
hard right now for the physics it can be
summed up in one sentence thin sheets
are easy to bend but hard to stretch
this is really important
thin sheets are easy to bend but hard to
stretch remember when we rolled our flat
sheet of rubber into a cylinder that
wasn't hard right but imagine how hard
you'd have to pull on the sheet to
increase its area by 10% it will be
pretty difficult the point is that
bending a thin sheet takes a relatively
small amount of force but stretching or
crumpling a thin sheet is much harder
now finally we get to talk about pizza
suppose you were down to the pizzeria
and buy yourself a slice you pick it up
from the crust first without doing the
fold because of
the slice bends downwards Pizza is
pretty thin after all and we know that
thin sheets are easy to bend you can't
get it in your mouth cheese and tomato
sauce are dripping everywhere it's a big
mess so you fold the crust when you do
that you force the pizza into something
like a taco shape that's not hard to do
after all this shape is isometric to the
original pizza which was flat but
imagine what would happen if the pizza
were to droop down while you're bending
it now it looks like a droopy tackle and
what is a droopy tackle look like a
potato chip but we know that potato
chips are not isometric to flat pieces
of rubber or flat pizzas and that means
that in order to get to the shape it's
in now the slice of pizza had to stretch
since the pizza is thin this takes a lot
of force compared to the amount of force
it takes to bend the pizza in the first
place so what's the conclusion when you
fold the pizza at the crust you make it
into a shape where a lot of force is
needed to bend the tip down often
gravity isn't strong enough to provide
this force that was kind of a lot of
information so let's do a quick
backwards recap when the pizza is folded
at the crust gravity isn't strong enough
to bend the tip why because stretching a
pizza is hard and to bend the tip
downwards the pizza would have to
stretch why because the shape that the
pizza would be in the droopy taco shape
isn't isometric to the original flat
pizza why because of math as the pizza
example shows we can learn a lot by
looking at the mathematical properties
of different shapes and it's especially
nice when those shapes happen to be
pizza slices
Oh